
.. _sec_densenet:

Densely Connected Networks (DenseNet)
=====================================


ResNet significantly changed the view of how to parametrize the
functions in deep networks. *DenseNet* (dense convolutional network) is
to some extent the logical extension of this
:cite:`Huang.Liu.Van-Der-Maaten.ea.2017`. DenseNet is characterized by
both the connectivity pattern where each layer connects to all the
preceding layers and the concatenation operation (rather than the
addition operator in ResNet) to preserve and reuse features from earlier
layers. To understand how to arrive at it, let’s take a small detour to
mathematics.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    import mlx.core as mx
    import mlx.nn as nn
    from d2l import mlx as d2l

From ResNet to DenseNet
-----------------------

Recall the Taylor expansion for functions. At the point :math:`x = 0` it
can be written as

.. math:: f(x) = f(0) + x \cdot \left[f'(0) + x \cdot \left[\frac{f''(0)}{2!}  + x \cdot \left[\frac{f'''(0)}{3!}  + \cdots \right]\right]\right].

The key point is that it decomposes a function into terms of
increasingly higher order. In a similar vein, ResNet decomposes
functions into

.. math:: f(\mathbf{x}) = \mathbf{x} + g(\mathbf{x}).

That is, ResNet decomposes :math:`f` into a simple linear term and a
more complex nonlinear one. What if we wanted to capture (not
necessarily add) information beyond two terms? One such solution is
DenseNet :cite:`Huang.Liu.Van-Der-Maaten.ea.2017`.

.. _fig_densenet_block:

.. figure:: ../img/densenet-block.svg

   The main difference between ResNet (left) and DenseNet (right) in
   cross-layer connections: use of addition and use of concatenation.


As shown in :numref:`fig_densenet_block`, the key difference between
ResNet and DenseNet is that in the latter case outputs are
*concatenated* (denoted by :math:`[,]`) rather than added. As a result,
we perform a mapping from :math:`\mathbf{x}` to its values after
applying an increasingly complex sequence of functions:

.. math::

   \mathbf{x} \to \left[
   \mathbf{x},
   f_1(\mathbf{x}),
   f_2\left(\left[\mathbf{x}, f_1\left(\mathbf{x}\right)\right]\right), f_3\left(\left[\mathbf{x}, f_1\left(\mathbf{x}\right), f_2\left(\left[\mathbf{x}, f_1\left(\mathbf{x}\right)\right]\right)\right]\right), \ldots\right].

In the end, all these functions are combined in MLP to reduce the number
of features again. In terms of implementation this is quite simple:
rather than adding terms, we concatenate them. The name DenseNet arises
from the fact that the dependency graph between variables becomes quite
dense. The final layer of such a chain is densely connected to all
previous layers. The dense connections are shown in
:numref:`fig_densenet`.

.. _fig_densenet:

.. figure:: ../img/densenet.svg

   Dense connections in DenseNet. Note how the dimensionality increases
   with depth.


The main components that comprise a DenseNet are *dense blocks* and
*transition layers*. The former define how the inputs and outputs are
concatenated, while the latter control the number of channels so that it
is not too large, since the expansion
:math:`\mathbf{x} \to \left[\mathbf{x}, f_1(\mathbf{x}), f_2\left(\left[\mathbf{x}, f_1\left(\mathbf{x}\right)\right]\right), \ldots \right]`
can be quite high-dimensional.

Dense Blocks
------------

DenseNet uses the modified “batch normalization, activation, and
convolution” structure of ResNet (see the exercise in
:numref:`sec_resnet`). First, we implement this convolution block
structure.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def conv_block(input_channels, num_channels):
        return nn.Sequential(
            nn.BatchNorm(input_channels), nn.ReLU(),
            nn.Conv2d(input_channels, num_channels, kernel_size=3, padding=1))

A *dense block* consists of multiple convolution blocks, each using the
same number of output channels. In the forward propagation, however, we
concatenate the input and output of each convolution block on the
channel dimension. Lazy evaluation allows us to adjust the
dimensionality automatically.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class DenseBlock(nn.Module):
        def __init__(self, num_convs, input_channels, num_channels):
            super(DenseBlock, self).__init__()
            layer = []
            for i in range(num_convs):
                layer.append(conv_block(
                    num_channels * i + input_channels, num_channels))
            self.net = nn.Sequential(*layer)
    
        def __call__(self, X):
            for blk in self.net.layers:
                Y = blk(X)
                # 连接通道维度上每个块的输入和输出
                X = mx.concatenate((X, Y), axis=3)
            return X

In the following example, we define a ``DenseBlock`` instance with two
convolution blocks of 10 output channels. When using an input with three
channels, we will get an output with :math:`3 + 10 + 10=23` channels.
The number of convolution block channels controls the growth in the
number of output channels relative to the number of input channels. This
is also referred to as the *growth rate*.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    blk = DenseBlock(2, 3, 10)
    X = mx.random.normal(shape=(4, 8, 8, 3))
    Y = blk(X)
    Y.shape




.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleoutputcell

.. parsed-literal::
    :class: output

    (4, 8, 8, 23)



Transition Layers
-----------------

Since each dense block will increase the number of channels, adding too
many of them will lead to an excessively complex model. A *transition
layer* is used to control the complexity of the model. It reduces the
number of channels by using a :math:`1\times 1` convolution. Moreover,
it halves the height and width via average pooling with a stride of 2.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def transition_block(input_channels, num_channels):
        return nn.Sequential(
            nn.BatchNorm(input_channels), nn.ReLU(),
            nn.Conv2d(input_channels, num_channels, kernel_size=1),
            nn.AvgPool2d(kernel_size=2, stride=2))

Apply a transition layer with 10 channels to the output of the dense
block in the previous example. This reduces the number of output
channels to 10, and halves the height and width.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    blk = transition_block(23, 10)
    blk(Y).shape




.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleoutputcell

.. parsed-literal::
    :class: output

    (4, 4, 4, 10)



DenseNet Model
--------------

Next, we will construct a DenseNet model. DenseNet first uses the same
single convolutional layer and max-pooling layer as in ResNet.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class DenseNet(d2l.Classifier):
        def b1(self):
            return nn.Sequential(
                nn.Conv2d(1, 64, kernel_size=7, stride=2, padding=3),
                nn.BatchNorm(64), nn.ReLU(),
                nn.MaxPool2d(kernel_size=3, stride=2, padding=1))

Then, similar to the four modules made up of residual blocks that ResNet
uses, DenseNet uses four dense blocks. As with ResNet, we can set the
number of convolutional layers used in each dense block. Here, we set it
to 4, consistent with the ResNet-18 model in :numref:`sec_resnet`.
Furthermore, we set the number of channels (i.e., growth rate) for the
convolutional layers in the dense block to 32, so 128 channels will be
added to each dense block.

In ResNet, the height and width are reduced between each module by a
residual block with a stride of 2. Here, we use the transition layer to
halve the height and width and halve the number of channels. Similar to
ResNet, a global pooling layer and a fully connected layer are connected
at the end to produce the output.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(DenseNet)
    def __init__(self, num_channels=64, growth_rate=32, arch=(4, 4, 4, 4),
                 lr=0.1, num_classes=10):
        super(DenseNet, self).__init__()
        self.save_hyperparameters()
        self.blks = []
        for i, num_convs in enumerate(arch):
            self.blks.append(DenseBlock(num_convs, num_channels, growth_rate))
            # The number of output channels in the previous dense block
            num_channels += num_convs * growth_rate
            # A transition layer that halves the number of channels is added
            # between the dense blocks
            if i != len(arch) - 1:
                self.blks.append(transition_block(num_channels, num_channels // 2))
                num_channels = num_channels // 2
        self.net = nn.Sequential(
            self.b1(), *self.blks,
            nn.BatchNorm(num_channels), nn.ReLU(),
            nn.AvgPool2d((2, 2)),
            nn.Sequential(lambda x: mx.flatten(x, start_axis=1)),
            nn.Linear(num_channels, num_classes))
    
        d2l.apply_init_cnn(self)

Training
--------

Since we are using a deeper network here, in this section, we will
reduce the input height and width from 224 to 96 to simplify the
computation.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    model = DenseNet(lr=0.01)
    trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10, num_gpus=1)
    data = d2l.FashionMNIST(batch_size=128, resize=(96, 96))
    trainer.fit(model, data)



.. figure:: output_densenet_1bae0e_17_0.svg


Summary and Discussion
----------------------

The main components that comprise DenseNet are dense blocks and
transition layers. For the latter, we need to keep the dimensionality
under control when composing the network by adding transition layers
that shrink the number of channels again. In terms of cross-layer
connections, in contrast to ResNet, where inputs and outputs are added
together, DenseNet concatenates inputs and outputs on the channel
dimension. Although these concatenation operations reuse features to
achieve computational efficiency, unfortunately they lead to heavy GPU
memory consumption. As a result, applying DenseNet may require more
memory-efficient implementations that may increase training time
:cite:`pleiss2017memory`.

Exercises
---------

1. Why do we use average pooling rather than max-pooling in the
   transition layer?
2. One of the advantages mentioned in the DenseNet paper is that its
   model parameters are smaller than those of ResNet. Why is this the
   case?
3. One problem for which DenseNet has been criticized is its high memory
   consumption.

   1. Is this really the case? Try to change the input shape to
      :math:`224\times 224` to compare the actual GPU memory consumption
      empirically.
   2. Can you think of an alternative means of reducing the memory
      consumption? How would you need to change the framework?

4. Implement the various DenseNet versions presented in Table 1 of the
   DenseNet paper :cite:`Huang.Liu.Van-Der-Maaten.ea.2017`.
5. Design an MLP-based model by applying the DenseNet idea. Apply it to
   the housing price prediction task in :numref:`sec_kaggle_house`.
