
.. _sec_seq2seq_attention:

The Bahdanau Attention Mechanism
================================


When we encountered machine translation in :numref:`sec_seq2seq`, we
designed an encoder–decoder architecture for sequence-to-sequence
learning based on two RNNs :cite:`Sutskever.Vinyals.Le.2014`.
Specifically, the RNN encoder transforms a variable-length sequence into
a *fixed-shape* context variable. Then, the RNN decoder generates the
output (target) sequence token by token based on the generated tokens
and the context variable.

Recall :numref:`fig_seq2seq_details` which we repeat
(:numref:`fig_s2s_attention_state`) with some additional detail.
Conventionally, in an RNN all relevant information about a source
sequence is translated into some internal *fixed-dimensional* state
representation by the encoder. It is this very state that is used by the
decoder as the complete and exclusive source of information for
generating the translated sequence. In other words, the
sequence-to-sequence mechanism treats the intermediate state as a
sufficient statistic of whatever string might have served as input.

.. _fig_s2s_attention_state:

.. figure:: ../img/seq2seq-state.svg

   Sequence-to-sequence model. The state, as generated by the encoder,
   is the only piece of information shared between the encoder and the
   decoder.


While this is quite reasonable for short sequences, it is clear that it
is infeasible for long ones, such as a book chapter or even just a very
long sentence. After all, before too long there will simply not be
enough “space” in the intermediate representation to store all that is
important in the source sequence. Consequently the decoder will fail to
translate long and complex sentences. One of the first to encounter this
was :cite:t:`Graves.2013` who tried to design an RNN to generate
handwritten text. Since the source text has arbitrary length they
designed a differentiable attention model to align text characters with
the much longer pen trace, where the alignment moves only in one
direction. This, in turn, draws on decoding algorithms in speech
recognition, e.g., hidden Markov models
:cite:`rabiner1993fundamentals`.

Inspired by the idea of learning to align,
:cite:t:`Bahdanau.Cho.Bengio.2014` proposed a differentiable attention
model *without* the unidirectional alignment limitation. When predicting
a token, if not all the input tokens are relevant, the model aligns (or
attends) only to parts of the input sequence that are deemed relevant to
the current prediction. This is then used to update the current state
before generating the next token. While quite innocuous in its
description, this *Bahdanau attention mechanism* has arguably turned
into one of the most influential ideas of the past decade in deep
learning, giving rise to Transformers
:cite:`Vaswani.Shazeer.Parmar.ea.2017` and many related new
architectures.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    import mlx
    import mlx.core as mx
    import mlx.nn as nn
    from d2l import mlx as d2l

Model
-----

We follow the notation introduced by the sequence-to-sequence
architecture of :numref:`sec_seq2seq`, in particular
:eq:`eq_seq2seq_s_t`. The key idea is that instead of keeping the
state, i.e., the context variable :math:`\mathbf{c}` summarizing the
source sentence, as fixed, we dynamically update it, as a function of
both the original text (encoder hidden states :math:`\mathbf{h}_{t}`)
and the text that was already generated (decoder hidden states
:math:`\mathbf{s}_{t'-1}`). This yields :math:`\mathbf{c}_{t'}`, which
is updated after any decoding time step :math:`t'`. Suppose that the
input sequence is of length :math:`T`. In this case the context variable
is the output of attention pooling:

.. math:: \mathbf{c}_{t'} = \sum_{t=1}^{T} \alpha(\mathbf{s}_{t' - 1}, \mathbf{h}_{t}) \mathbf{h}_{t}.

We used :math:`\mathbf{s}_{t' - 1}` as the query, and
:math:`\mathbf{h}_{t}` as both the key and the value. Note that
:math:`\mathbf{c}_{t'}` is then used to generate the state
:math:`\mathbf{s}_{t'}` and to generate a new token: see
:eq:`eq_seq2seq_s_t`. In particular, the attention weight
:math:`\alpha` is computed as in :eq:`eq_attn-scoring-alpha` using
the additive attention scoring function defined by
:eq:`eq_additive-attn`. This RNN encoder–decoder architecture using
attention is depicted in :numref:`fig_s2s_attention_details`. Note
that later this model was modified so as to include the already
generated tokens in the decoder as further context (i.e., the attention
sum does not stop at :math:`T` but rather it proceeds up to
:math:`t'-1`). For instance, see :cite:t:`chan2015listen` for a
description of this strategy, as applied to speech recognition.

.. _fig_s2s_attention_details:

.. figure:: ../img/seq2seq-details-attention.svg

   Layers in an RNN encoder–decoder model with the Bahdanau attention
   mechanism.


Defining the Decoder with Attention
-----------------------------------

To implement the RNN encoder–decoder with attention, we only need to
redefine the decoder (omitting the generated symbols from the attention
function simplifies the design). Let’s begin with the base interface for
decoders with attention by defining the quite unsurprisingly named
``AttentionDecoder`` class.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class AttentionDecoder(d2l.Decoder):  #@save
        """The base attention-based decoder interface."""
        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__()
    
        @property
        def attention_weights(self):
            raise NotImplementedError

We need to implement the RNN decoder in the ``Seq2SeqAttentionDecoder``
class. The state of the decoder is initialized with (i) the hidden
states of the last layer of the encoder at all time steps, used as keys
and values for attention; (ii) the hidden state of the encoder at all
layers at the final time step, which serves to initialize the hidden
state of the decoder; and (iii) the valid length of the encoder, to
exclude the padding tokens in attention pooling. At each decoding time
step, the hidden state of the final layer of the decoder, obtained at
the previous time step, is used as the query of the attention mechanism.
Both the output of the attention mechanism and the input embedding are
concatenated to serve as the input of the RNN decoder.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class Seq2SeqAttentionDecoder(AttentionDecoder):
        def __init__(self, num_inputs, vocab_size, embed_size, num_hiddens, num_layers, k_inputs, q_inputs,
                     dropout=0):
            super().__init__()
            self.attention = d2l.AdditiveAttention(k_inputs, q_inputs, num_hiddens, dropout)
            self.embedding = nn.Embedding(vocab_size, embed_size)
            self.rnn = d2l.GRU(
                embed_size + num_hiddens, num_hiddens, num_layers,
                dropout=dropout)
            self.dense = nn.Linear(num_inputs, vocab_size)
            for module in self.modules():
                if isinstance(module, nn.Linear) or isinstance(module, d2l.GRU):
                    module.update(mlx.utils.tree_map(lambda x: d2l.init_seq2seq(x), module.parameters()))
    
        def init_state(self, enc_outputs, enc_valid_lens):
            # Shape of outputs: (num_steps, batch_size, num_hiddens).
            # Shape of hidden_state: (num_layers, batch_size, num_hiddens)
            outputs, hidden_state = enc_outputs
            return (outputs.transpose(1, 0, 2), hidden_state, enc_valid_lens)
    
        def __call__(self, X, state):
            # Shape of enc_outputs: (batch_size, num_steps, num_hiddens).
            # Shape of hidden_state: (num_layers, batch_size, num_hiddens)
            enc_outputs, hidden_state, enc_valid_lens = state
            # Shape of the output X: (num_steps, batch_size, embed_size)
            X = self.embedding(X).transpose(1, 0, 2)
            outputs, self._attention_weights = [], []
            for x in X:
                # Shape of query: (batch_size, 1, num_hiddens)
                query = mx.expand_dims(hidden_state[-1], axis=1)
                # Shape of context: (batch_size, 1, num_hiddens)
                context = self.attention(
                    query, enc_outputs, enc_outputs, enc_valid_lens)
                # Concatenate on the feature dimension
                x = mx.concatenate((context, mx.expand_dims(x, axis=1)), axis=-1)
                # Reshape x as (1, batch_size, embed_size + num_hiddens)
                out, hidden_state = self.rnn(x.transpose(1, 0, 2), hidden_state)
                outputs.append(out)
                self._attention_weights.append(self.attention.attention_weights)
            # After fully connected layer transformation, shape of outputs:
            # (num_steps, batch_size, vocab_size)
            outputs = self.dense(mx.concatenate(outputs, axis=0))
            return outputs.transpose(1, 0, 2), [enc_outputs, hidden_state,
                                              enc_valid_lens]
    
        @property
        def attention_weights(self):
            return self._attention_weights

In the following, we test the implemented decoder with attention using a
minibatch of four sequences, each of which are seven time steps long.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    vocab_size, embed_size, num_hiddens, num_layers = 10, 8, 16, 2
    batch_size, num_steps = 4, 7
    num_inputs, k_inputs, q_inputs = 16, 16, 16
    encoder = d2l.Seq2SeqEncoder(vocab_size, embed_size, num_hiddens, num_layers)
    decoder = Seq2SeqAttentionDecoder(num_inputs, vocab_size, embed_size, num_hiddens,
                                      num_layers, k_inputs, q_inputs)
    
    X = mx.zeros((batch_size, num_steps), dtype=mx.int64)
    state = decoder.init_state(encoder(X), None)
    output, state = decoder(X, state)
    d2l.check_shape(output, (batch_size, num_steps, vocab_size))
    d2l.check_shape(state[0], (batch_size, num_steps, num_hiddens))
    d2l.check_shape(state[1][0], (batch_size, num_hiddens))

Training
--------

Now that we specified the new decoder we can proceed analogously to
:numref:`sec_seq2seq_training`: specify the hyperparameters,
instantiate a regular encoder and a decoder with attention, and train
this model for machine translation.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = d2l.MTFraEng(batch_size=128)
    embed_size, num_hiddens, num_layers, dropout = 256, 256, 2, 0.2
    num_inputs, k_inputs, q_inputs = 256, 256, 256
    encoder = d2l.Seq2SeqEncoder(
        len(data.src_vocab), embed_size, num_hiddens, num_layers, dropout)
    decoder = Seq2SeqAttentionDecoder(
        num_inputs, len(data.tgt_vocab), embed_size, num_hiddens, num_layers, k_inputs, q_inputs, dropout)
    model = d2l.Seq2Seq(encoder, decoder, tgt_pad=data.tgt_vocab['<pad>'],
                        lr=0.001)
    trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=30, gradient_clip_val=1, num_gpus=1)
    trainer.fit(model, data)



.. figure:: output_bahdanau-attention_e7991b_9_0.svg


After the model is trained, we use it to translate a few English
sentences into French and compute their BLEU scores.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    engs = ['go .', 'i lost .', 'he\'s calm .', 'i\'m home .']
    fras = ['va !', 'j\'ai perdu .', 'il est calme .', 'je suis chez moi .']
    preds, _ = model.predict_step(
        data.build(engs, fras), d2l.try_gpu(), data.num_steps)
    preds = preds.tolist()
    for en, fr, p in zip(engs, fras, preds):
        translation = []
        for token in data.tgt_vocab.to_tokens(p):
            if token == '<eos>':
                break
            translation.append(token)
        print(f'{en} => {translation}, bleu,'
              f'{d2l.bleu(" ".join(translation), fr, k=2):.3f}')


.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleoutputcell

.. parsed-literal::
    :class: output

    go . => ['va', '!'], bleu,1.000
    i lost . => ["j'ai", 'perdu', '.'], bleu,1.000
    he's calm . => ['nous', '<unk>', '.'], bleu,0.000
    i'm home . => ['je', 'suis', 'chez', 'moi', '.'], bleu,1.000


Let’s visualize the attention weights when translating the last English
sentence. We see that each query assigns non-uniform weights over
key–value pairs. It shows that at each decoding step, different parts of
the input sequences are selectively aggregated in the attention pooling.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    _, dec_attention_weights = model.predict_step(
        data.build([engs[-1]], [fras[-1]]), d2l.try_gpu(), data.num_steps, True)
    attention_weights = mx.concatenate(
        [step[0][0][0] for step in dec_attention_weights], 0)
    attention_weights = attention_weights.reshape((1, 1, -1, data.num_steps))

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    # Plus one to include the end-of-sequence token
    d2l.show_heatmaps(
        attention_weights[:, :, :, :len(engs[-1].split()) + 1],
        xlabel='Key positions', ylabel='Query positions')



.. figure:: output_bahdanau-attention_e7991b_14_0.svg


Summary
-------

When predicting a token, if not all the input tokens are relevant, the
RNN encoder–decoder with the Bahdanau attention mechanism selectively
aggregates different parts of the input sequence. This is achieved by
treating the state (context variable) as an output of additive attention
pooling. In the RNN encoder–decoder, the Bahdanau attention mechanism
treats the decoder hidden state at the previous time step as the query,
and the encoder hidden states at all the time steps as both the keys and
values.

Exercises
---------

1. Replace GRU with LSTM in the experiment.
2. Modify the experiment to replace the additive attention scoring
   function with the scaled dot-product. How does it influence the
   training efficiency?
